Jordi, we will talk about a topic
that seems to me to be exciting
and to many people it generates
curiosity and is the exit.
It’s that moment when the founders
of a startup or a company sell
it and I would like to ask
you a series of questions.
First, tell us a little
about your case.
My case is the case of a
co-founder of a technology-based
company, of an internet company
and is a bit of the paradigmatic case.
Well, we were two original
founders with our savings, we set
up a company in a garage, we raised
capital money from the...
What years were you?
He was 33 years old at that
time.
And we went through an accelerator
called Sea Rocket, we raised money
from Business Angels and risk
capital in several rounds and just
a year ago, eight years after having
mounted the company, the majority
of Habitísimo’s capital has been
sold, in this case to another company
and the founding team still
remains in the company and Habitísimo
today, we are 250 people in the
team and operating in nine
different countries in the
world.
Then we started two and we brought
the company with the help of investors
and the entire team to this
state.
It is the paradigmatic case of success,
that is, company that is growing,
that investors accompany you, that
you end up leaving in a period
of eight years and also you stay
with part of the company, etc.
And I’ll go ask you a few questions
not just about your particular
case, but about what is usually
the case.
well is.
To understand how these operations
or success work.
What are the most common types
of success, the types of comparisons?
It is worth, then, to see, when one mount
a company as an entrepreneur has to
know what he wants to do with it,
what is his goal and if he will be
all his life because it is his vital
personal project and can do it alone,
for example, or accompanied
by another partner, or if he will
require, for example, investors.
So if you need investors, then
you have to have planned
that those investors will want
to leave the company at
some point because investors
invest to get a return on
their investment.
That is something that needs to
be clear.
Investor will not have to say that
there will have to be a success or a
departure from those investors and in
that success because the founding
team can also go out or not.
You can take the company to stock, that
would be a case, but it is very uncommon
because you have to have taken
the company a already considerable
size and the most common success
is that the company is sold
to a third party.
And that third, to simplify it, there
are two types of buyers.
A financial buyer who sees it as an
investment and wants to continue growing
and then only sell it again
and an industrial buyer who would
be another company similar to yours
that probably operates in the
same sector, where you get synergies
with your product or
service and who is about
to stay all life in that project.
Yes, like the industrial buyer, for example,
if you have a marketplace in
Spain and it is seen as the red
black, a larger competitor,
a European player, worldwide or whatever,
comes to buy you because you
are a black.
Exactly, but there may be a competitor,
who probably did not compete in
your country, but from another market
that wants to be implanted in your
market or can be, in our case,
an industrial company.
That is, it was a company that
operated in our sector but with another
value proposal, more offline,
more traditional and that saw in
us a way to innovate and to open
another source of income and
business opportunities for
that project.
In my case, he was an
industrial buyer.
Basically, the difference is industrial,
it is someone in your sector,
be it global, local, direct
competitor, another value proposal,
etc.
The financial is a fund, companies
that have a diversified portfolio
of investments but are not
in your sector.
Usually, the buyer usually acquires
100%, usually acquires
a part.
How is the structure of the operation
usually?
There is no single recipe
that works for all cases.
Each case and each sector is
different because it will depend much
on the situation of the buyer, the
situation of the seller, the situation
of the founding team, the market
and others.
But normally, what I think happens
is that buyers want the founding
team to be a while because
that first gives them more assurances
and more confidence
that the project will go on
the right track.
But, for example, it’s not the same thing to buy.
We are talking about the purchase
of a company that has gone well, which
can be different from buying a company
that goes wrong or because it is
back or because there are assets
and others.
But in the case we are talking
about here, it’s a company that’s going
well.
The buyer always has a certain fear
that what he is buying is what
he has been told, what it seems
to be.
So if the management team, the founding
team, still keeps on for a while,
I think that’s a good sign
that the team is believing in
that long-term project and that
commitment and that there won’
t be too much disruption in
the day-to-day operations.
and perfect.
But it has all the sense of the world,
right?
and exact.
So, they often ask that you be a time
and there are some clauses for
that you be a certain time.
Usually, this time is linked to
a prize.
In that purchase-sale operation,
it has probably been agreed that
it will be bought at 100%, but now
only one part is paid and there is
another part that will be paid in
equal time and maybe the price
of that second part can depend
on a few goals to.
That varies a little.
and exact.
There are also a thousand models and
you would have to talk to an expert on
this type of transactions to get into
detail.
I am not an expert in that.
What happens sometimes is that
the entrepreneur, for example,
also, simplifies everything and
makes a little caricature,
but the entrepreneur doesn’t usually
be a manager or a manager.
He is a businessman who doesn’t
like to have a boss.
So what happens sometimes is that when
you have sold the company and you are
in a structure a little bigger, more
dumb than grateful, with someone
to report, because that entrepreneur
no longer feels as comfortable
as before and can no longer
do as before what they were
giving him the pleasure.
Yes, yes yes yes
There may be a little tension.
There are cases, in fact, that this
is to be understood well, because
effectively the entrepreneur is not
a manager.
The entrepreneur has other...
Usually there are people who know
how to reconvert, but
usually the competences are very
different.
and exact.
He is a missionary, he is an impulsive
uncle, he is a uncle...
And it has also made this company
grow from scratch.
Then one day they buy it and
then they put some bosses on it.
And people take it very badly.
And there are cases where there are
people who even go ahead of time
losing a bunch of millions because...
Because he is no longer happy.
But then there’s also no single
recipe here, because it
will depend a lot on the end
if you really integrate into
a larger structure or continue
to operate at least as
a separate unit.
So, there may be...
There is no single case that describes everything.
and yes.
But it’s good what you’ve told and the
anecdote because it’s a reality that
happens.
Tell us briefly what the process,
the sales process of your company is.
Well then...
The process begins by...
I think that companies
buy or sell.
Then the process begins with
a buyer’s show of interest in
what you’re doing.
That said, I think it’s important
for any entrepreneur, for any
entrepreneur, to always be working
relationships or building
relationships and contacts
with potential buyers
from day to day.
Financial, industrial, competitors
in other countries, in the
entire market.
But it all starts because someday someone
is knocking on your door and
saying they are interested in
buying you.
You can do this yourself
or you can do it
with a...
In other words, a company that
helps you with this process.
It is usually recommended to have a broker
who will help you through the whole
process because you are not
an expert in that and that broker
will help you.
This broker will excel a
process schedule.
You can also try to get another
competition to that buyer.
Competition is good because it
can improve the conditions for the
seller.
And the stake of this is that
that broker again charges a
percentage or fee of the transaction.
There’s a retainer that’s called, which
is like a fixed one to cover your expenses
and minimum, and then joins a percentage
to success.
These are respectable figures, so sometimes
you have to negotiate well.
Then this purchase process begins
with a letter of intent
where the buyer says we are
interested in acquiring this
company more or less in these
general lines and we will
enter a period called
due diligence.
Due diligence basically consists in
that that buyer will want to check
with auditors and with professionals
that what you have told
him is true.
He will take up all the carpets,
he will look at all the books, to
see that what one says is true.
This process is very difficult because
it usually takes months.
And it is hard because it requires
a high workload, reporting, meeting,
explaining things, and in parallel
you have to continue to get the
business day by day and also you
have to try to get that if
you had a business plan that is
to go to fulfill that because
if you do not comply that because
somehow you lose credibility
during this process.
And the value of the company, in
the end the value may have been
impacted and if you are not bought,
the operation is not closed.
This happens many times and it has happened
to us.
We have been in three processes
of these and it has been the third
ball defeated, but before we
have had two processes failed.
They are weakened.
They are intense, but if one takes
it as a source of learning after
that process we have been a better
company and we have been better
entrepreneurs.
At the end of this process is
the transaction.
If everything is well, it is signed
a day before a notary and celebrated,
try to celebrate it In our case
we have not celebrated
too much and the next day
we went back to work.
Recommended in all that is to have
a very good lawyer because they
are complex issues and also a good
tax officer because the part
of taxes and tax are usually very relevant.
As I said, I have some advice to summarize.
The broker, go working always in relationships
as an entrepreneur, the broker,
the lawyer, the prosecutor.
The prosecutor at the personal level.
At a personal level.